@Section 
 @Title { What can gstat do? }
 @Tag { what }
@Begin

@DP
This section describes what can be done with gstat, and forms the bridge
between the previous section on theory, and the next section on how
gstat works. Gstat can do variogram modelling by using the two-step
procedure of first calculating the sample variogram and fitting a model
to this sample variogram (by estimating model parameters), or by
directly fitting of a (nested) variogram model using restricted maximum
likelyhood (REML, Mardia and Marshall, 1984).

# modelling
@DP
@I{Sample variogram calculation}
@LP
Gstat calculates the sample variogram or covariogram from raw data or
from residuals. Residuals @E{e hat (s) = z(s) - X beta hat} are obtained
by ordinary least squares, weighted least squares or generalized least
squares estimation of the trend parameters @E{beta hat} (by default from
OLS residuals).  When calculating a sample variogram, one may choose to
calculate squared differences @E{1 frac 2 ( e hat (s sub i )- e hat (s
sub j )) sup 2} for each observation pair (variogram cloud), or to
average squared differences over distance intervals for a number of
distance intervals @E{[h sub i , h sub i + delta sub i ] , i = 0...r}
(sample variogram).  The number of intervals @E{r}, their (constant or
varying) width @E{delta sub i} and the direction interval in which the
vector between observation pairs must lie can be specified.

@PP
For single variables, the ``classic'' sample variogram (or
semivariogram, or moments estimator, Journel and Huijbregts, 1978, II.6)
can be calculated, or optionally Cressie's square-root robust variogram
estimator (e.g. Cressie 1985, (4); Cressie 1991, (2.4.12)). For pairs of
variables, the ``classic'' cross variogram (Journel and Huijbregts,
1978, II.15) is calculated when the observation locations of both
variables coincide, or else the ``pseudo'' cross variogram (Myers, 1991;
Ver Hoef and Cressie, 1993) is calculated. In addition, the ordinary
(moments) covariogram (Journel and Huijbregts, 1978, II.2) and the cross
covariograms (Journel and Huijbregts, 1978, II.15) can be calculated.

@DP
@I{Fitting variogram models}
@LP
In gstat, variogram models are defined as one simple variogram model or
as a sum of two or more simple variogram models. A simple variogram
model consists of a model type and a variance scaling factor (usually
the ``partial sill''), most models also have a distance scaling factor
(usually the ``partial range''). Model types supported include the nugget,
linear, spherical, exponential, Gaussian, circular, pentaspherical,
power and logarithmic model. The range parameter can be defined as an
ellipse in 2 dimensions or an ellipsoid in 3 dimensions (as in GSLIB,
Deutsch and Journel, 1992). This allows the modelling of geometric and
zonal anisotropy (Isaaks and Srivastava, 1989).

@PP
Following Cressie (1985), variogram models can be fitted to each of the
above sample variograms by non-linear weighted least squares estimation
of variogram model parameters. Weights can be chosen to be proportional
to either @E{N sub i} or to @E{(gamma( h overbar sub i )) sup -2 N sub
i}, with @E{N sub i} the number of observation pairs in distance
interval @E{i}, and @E{gamma( h overbar sub i )} the variogram model
value at @E{h overbar sub i}, the average distance between pairs of
observations in interval @E{i}. (Note that the latter weighting factor
has received some criticism from Zhang, Van Eijkeren and Heemink (1995)
and from Safai-Naraghi and Marcotte (1997).) The variogram fitting
procedure in gstat allows to exclude one or more variogram parameters
(partial sill or range) from a fit.

@PP
Because it is an iterative procedure, non-linear estimation is not
guaranteed to converge to good estimates and it is always possible that
some local minimum is found. Choosing suitable initial parameter
estimates is an important aspect for the succes of non-linear estimation
(Draper and Smith, 1981). A procedure that may circumvent convergence to
a local minimum to some extent is the following: (i) estimate the number
of nested models and their ranges from the sample variogram plot (trying
several combinations of @E{delta sub i}, @E{r}, and directions), (ii)
fix the range parameters and estimate the sills of the models and (iii)
use these values as initial estimates for a non-linear fit. It is
standard practice to check each fit by simultaneous plotting of the
sample variogram and the fitted model. Anisotropy parameters cannot be
estimated automatically in gstat, they should be chosen by trial and
error.

@PP
Simultaneous estimation of multiple direct and cross variograms cannot
be done automatically in gstat. However, by only estimating partial
sills (fixing range parameters) a linear model of coregionalization can
easily be constructed. (Presence of the linear model of
coregionalization or intrinsic correlation is checked and notified to
the user by gstat before a cokriging or co-simulation is started.)

@PP
Maximum likelyhood estimation in gstat currently involves only the
estimation of partial sills of the simple models, and is not implemented
for cross (co)variograms.

@DP
@I{Prediction and simulation}
@LP
Prediction in gstat comprises universal kriging ((@Eqblup) and
(@Eqblupv), using coordinate polynomial or arbitrary, user-defined base
functions), ordinary kriging, and simple kriging ((@Eqblp) and
(@Eqblpv)), as well as weighted least squares or ordinary least squares
prediction and inverse distance weighted interpolation (e.g. Burrough,
1986).  All kriging methods may be multivariable, and different
variables may share one or more common parameters. By default,
prediction methods refer to prediction of a quantity, the size of a
single observation (point prediction). Optionally, block means (the
average of all observations over some block) can be predicted (block
prediction).  Blocks may be rectangular in 1, 2 or 3 dimensions or
user-defined (e.g.  irregularly shaped).

@PP
Prediction may be global, using all observations for each prediction, or
local, using only a subset of observations in a neighbourhood around the
prediction location. Relative to the prediction location, this subset
may be defined in terms of the maximum distance or the number of closest
observations, or a combination. The distance criterium may be either the
geographical (euclidian) distance or the variogram distance (allowing
the prevalence of the most correlated data points). The maximum number
of closest observations may be specified per quadrant (2D) or octant
(3D), and the number of non-empty quadrants (octants) can be reported
for diagnostic purposes.

@PP
As an alternative to prediction, the estimated trend at prediction
locations, @E{x (s sub 0 ) beta hat} can be obtained, along with its
estimation variance (the last (third) term in the right-hand
side of (@Eqblupv)). This can be done by generalized, weighted or
ordinary least squares, using a global or local neighbourhood.

@PP
Simulation in gstat comprises (multi-) Gaussian or (multi-) indicator
simulation. Gaussian simulation may apply to point values or to block
averages. For simulation, the sequential simulation algorithm (Johnson,
1987) is used. Compared to other simulation methods, sequential
simulation is robust: it can handle arbitrary covariance structures and
data dimensions, and an arbitrary number of variables or simulation
locations. Certain practical drawbacks of the technique can be overcome
by a clever choice of the visiting sequence (section
@NumberOf{implementation}).


@End @Section
